# Lab11 Assignemnt
This assignment requires you to run a Python program called raid.py that simulates a RAID similar to what you have done in Task 11.2. It is a simple simulator of various types of corruptions that may occur in a simple file system. This simple file system is the same as the one used in Task 10.2.

--------------------------------------------------

## Task 01:
__Use the timing mode of raid.py to obtain the total time for 100 random reads/writes to the RAID with 4 disks at levels 0, 1, 4, and 5. You may use a range of 1000 and assume left-asymmetric RAID-5.__

```py
// read(-w 0) change -L value
python3 raid.py -D 4 -n 100 -W rand -R 1000 -L 0 -w 0 -t -c // -L 0-4
python3 raid.py -D 4 -n 100 -W rand -R 1000 -L 5 -w 0 -5 LA -t -c // 5 LA

// write (-w 100), change -L value
python3 raid.py -D 4 -n 100 -W rand -R 1000 -L 0 -w 100 -t -c // -L 0-4
python3 raid.py -D 4 -n 100 -W rand -R 1000 -L 5 -w 100 -5 LA -t -c // 5 LA
```

```js
+------------+----------------------------------+
| RAID Level | Total Time for 100 random reads  |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     0      | 177.59999999999994               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     1      | 226.29999999999995               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     4      | 235.89999999999998               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     5      | 204.0                            |
+------------+----------------------------------+
```

```js
+------------+----------------------------------+
| RAID Level | Total Time for 100 random writes |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     0      | 177.59999999999994               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     1      | 424.90000000000026               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     4      | 715.7000000000007                |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     5      | 428.83333333333326               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
```
#### (a) How do the read and write timing results compare across these four RAID levels? Which arrangement is the most efficient for reading and which one for writing?__
- Results:
    - RAID level 0: Fastest read, fastest write.
    - RAID level 1: Third fastest read, second fastest write.
    - RAID level 4: Slowest read, slowest write.
    - RAID level 5: Second fastest read, third fastest write.
- In terms of performance RAID level 0 is the most efficient option for both reading and writing. RAID level 0 uses striping, which uses all available disks and distributes the data across them, resulting in faster random read and write operations when compared to RAID levels 1, 4, and 5.
- RAID 0 prioritizes performance at the expense of redundancy and fault tolerance, making it more suited for applications where read and write performance are of a higher priority than data redundancy. An example use case could be a scratch disk for temporary storage, where fast access times would greatly benefit the user. A bad use case would be for archiving important data.
- If a balance between reliability and performance is required, RAID level 5 outperforms RAID levels 1, 4, and 5 due to its utilization of a parity disk striping method, setting it apart from RAID level 1.


#### (b) Give reasons why the relative performances across RAID levels are as you tabled.__
- __RAID Level 0:__ Has highest performance as it fully leverages all four disks for both reading and writing operations, with each disk contributing to data storage and retrieval.

- __RAID Level 1:__ Introduces increased latency primarily due to its reliance on two disks: one for data retrieval (read) or data storage (write) and another for mirroring the data. The mirrored disk maintains copies of the original disk's data, ensuring redundancy and protection against disk failures.

- __RAID Level 4:__ In general, experiences longer write times. The delay stems from the introduction of parity to a single dedicated disk while other disks handle read and write operations. The extended time requirement can be attributed to the computational overhead of parity calculations across all disks, making it the least efficient choice for write-intensive tasks or scenarios involving high input/output (I/O). Frequent recalculations of disk parity are often necessary.

- __RAID Level 5:__ Reduces write times compared to RAID Level 4 by distributing parity across multiple disks. This approach accelerates the write process, especially for smaller write operations. However, it comes at the expense of slightly slower read performance due to the complexity of parity distribution across multiple disks.

--------------------------------------------------

## Task 02:
__Tabulate the timing results of 100 random writes to left-asymmetric RAID-5 for 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 disks.__

```py
// write, change -D value
python3 raid.py -D 4 -n 100 -W rand -R 1000 -L 5 -w 100 -5 LA -t -c // 5 LA
```

```js
+------------+----------------------------------+
| Disk No.   | Total Time for 100 random writes |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     4      | 428.83333333333326               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     5      | 318.5                            |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     6      | 270.4599999999999                |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     7      | 179.66666666666663               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
|     8      | 142.20000000000002               |
+------------+----------------------------------+
```

#### How does the performance scale as the number of disks increases? Give plausible reason(s) for this observation?
- From the timing results, it can be observed that the time required for 100 random writes decreases as the number of disks increase. This indicates that the speed of writing will be progressively faster with a greater number of disks. This can be attributed to RAID Level 5 distributing parity across multiple disks. Thus, reducing the workload per disk for each request. Having more disks enables a more efficient distribution of reading and writing tasks as there are more resources available for handling data read and write operations.

--------------------------------------------------