# Lab10 Assignemnt
This lab assignment requires you to answer questions related to various types of corruptions that may occur in a simple file system.

The simple file system is the same as the one in Task 10.2. First, there is an inode bitmap, which marks whether each corresponding inode is allocated (1) or free (0). There are 16 inodes. Each allocated inode has contents consisting of three fields. The first field is either f (file) or d (directory). The second field a either points to a single data block or is -1 which indicates that the files is empty. Note that in this limited file system, each file or directory can only occupy a single data block. The third field is a reference count for files. For directories, it indicates the number of directories within this directory.

--------------------------------------------------

## Question 01: The state of the filesystem is shown below:
```c
inode bitmap 1000110001100000
inodes       [d a:0 r:4] [] [] [] [f a:8 r:2] [d a:11 r:2] [] []
             [][d a:5 r:2] [d a:4 r:3] [] [] [] [d a:-1 r:1] []

data bitmap 1000110010010000
data        [(.,0) (..,0) (g,10) (w,5) (i,4)] [] [] []
            [(.,10) (..,0) (z,9) (c,4)] [(.,9) (..,10)] [] []
            [f] [] [] [(.,5) (..,0)] [] [] [] []
```

#### (a) Is there any inconsistency in this filesystem? If so, what is the inconsistency?
- The 14th inode number `[d a:-1 r:1]`, is a directory with an address of `-1`, and reference value of `1`. Inode bitmap has the 14th bit as `0`, indicating said inode is free. There is also not reference to the directory in data or data bitmap.

#### (b) What could be done to repair this filesystem so that it is consistent again?
- The 14th bit in inode bitmap should be set to 1 `[inode bitmap 1000110001100010]`, directory should be assigned to a data block, with data bitmap being updated to reflect this i.e. `[(.,14) (..,0)]`, the address in inode should point to a datablock `[d a:<datablock#> r:1]`. Or could remove directory from inodes.

--------------------------------------------------

## Question 02: The state of the filesystem is now found to be:
```c
inode bitmap 1000110001100000
inodes       [d a:0 r:4] [] [] [] [f a:8 r:2] [d a:11 r:2] [] []
             [] [d a:5 r:2] [d a:4 r:3] [] [f a:-1 r:1] [] [] []

data bitmap 1000110010010000
data        [(.,0) (..,0) (g,10) (w,5) (i,4)] [] [] []
            [(.,10) (..,0) (z,9) (c,4)] [(.,9) (..,10)] [] []
            [f] [] [] [(.,5) (..,0)] [] [] [] []
```

#### (a) What is the inconsistency in this case?
- The 12th inode is a is a regular file, which is empty `(address field set to -1)`, and has just one link in the file system. The 12th bit in the inode bitmap is showing as 0, which is incorrect.

#### (b) What is the difference between this case and the one in Question 1?
- It is a regular file not a directory, and only files can be empty which would have the address of the data block set to -1, as is the case here. There is currently no data saved to the file.

#### (c) What could be done to repair this filesystem so that it is consistent again?
- 12th bit in inode bitmap should be set to 1. `[inode bitmap 1000110001101000]`.

--------------------------------------------------

## Question 03: The state of the filesystem is as below:
```c
inode bitmap 1000110001100000
inodes       [f a:0 r:4] [] [] [] [f a:8 r:2] [d a:11 r:2] [] []
             [] [d a:5 r:2] [d a:4 r:3] [] [] [] [] []
             
data bitmap 1000110010010000
data        [(.,0) (..,0) (g,10) (w,5) (i,4)] [] [] []
            [(.,10) (..,0) (z,9) (c,4)] [(.,9) (..,10)] [] []
            [f] [] [] [(.,5) (..,0)] [] [] [] []
```

#### (a) What could have happened that caused the filesystem to result in this state?
- From investigating the data block, we can see that there should be a root directory at the 0th inode. However, at the 0th inode, the first field indicates that it is a file rather than a directory. What may have caused this is that the system wrote to the wrong inode, or there are bugs in the code.

#### (b) Could this filesystem be repaired without data loss? Why?
- Set the flag for the 0th inode from f to d. `[d a:0 r:4]`. Once it is changed to d, then the rest of the file system become consistent again as it then will link to the datablock at 0, and the references of 4 are the correct number.

#### (c) If not, how much data are lost?
- None, as system can be repaired.

--------------------------------------------------

## Question 04: The state of the filesystem is as below:
```c
inode bitmap 1000110001100000
inodes       [d a:0 r:4] [] [] [] [f a:8 r:2] [d a:11 r:2] [] []
             [] [d a:5 r:2] [d a:4 r:3] [] [] [] [] []

data bitmap 1000110010010000
data        [(.,0) (..,0) (g,10) (w,5) (i,4)] [] [] []
            [(.,10) (..,0) (z,9) (c,4)] [(.,9) (..,10)] [] []
            [f] [] [] [(.,5) (..,3)] [] [] [] []
```

#### (a) Is there sufficient redundancy in the file system structure that enables a repair?
- Yes.

#### (b) If so, what is it and how could the filesystem be repaired?
- The 5th inode `[d a:11 r:2]` in the inode data structure points to the 11th data block, which is `[(.,5) (..,3)]`.
- However, the parent directory 3 is unallocated, as confirmed by the 3rd bit in the inode bitmap being 0, and 3rd inode in the inode data structure being empty.
- This results in sufficient redundancy as `[(.,5) (..,3)]` parent pointer is pointing to an unallocated inode. Repair by assigning the parent directory to any of the available existing directories and update the data block and reference count for the parent directory.

--------------------------------------------------