# _xv6: A Simple, UNIX-like teaching OS_
## __01 Operating system interfaces__
### __01.1 Processes and memory__
### __01.2 I/O and File descriptors__
### __01.3 Pipes__
### __01.4 File system__
### __01.5 Real world__
### __01.6 Exercises__
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
## __02 Operating system organization__
#### Operating system must fufill three requirements:
1. multiplexing
2. isolation
3. interaction

#### xv6
- chapter focus on mainstream designs centered around `monolithic kernal`.
- xv6 runs on a multi-core RISC-V micorprocessor.
- Much of low-level functionality is specific to RISC-V.
- Written in "LP64" C, (L)ong (P)ointers in C programming are 64-bits, but int is 32-bit.
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.1 Abstracting physical resources__
- Could have apps directly interact hardware resources, i.e., embedded systems. Not good for mre than one app running.
#### Achieving strong isolation
- Helpful to forbid applications from directly accessing sensitive hardware resources.
- Instead abstract the resources into services.
- i.e., Unix interacts with file system's open, read, write, and close system calls.
#### Time-sharing
- Unix transparently switches CPUs among processes, saving and restoring register state as necessay, so that applications don't have to be aware of time-sharing.
- Allows OS to share CPUs, even if some apps in inifinite loop.
#### Place process in memory
- Unix processes use `exec` to build up memory image, instead of direct interaction.
#### File descriptors
- Many forms of interaction among Unix processes occur via file descriptors.
- Abstracts many details, defined in way that simplifies interaction.26k
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.2 User mode, supervisor mode, and system calls__
#### To achieve strong isolation
- OS must arrange that applications cannot modify (or even read) the OS's data structures and instructions and that applications cannot access other processes's memory.
- CPUs provide hardware support for strong isolation.
- Software running in kernal space(or supervisor mode) is called the `kernel`.
#### RISC-V three modes that CPU can execute instructions
1. machine mode, full priviledge.
2. supervisor mode, execute privieged instrcutions.
3. user mode, app can only execute user-mode instructions.
#### Invoking kernal functionality
- If an app wants to invoke, it must transition to kernal.
- App cannot invoke kernal function directly.
- CPUs provide a special instruction that switches CPU from user-mode to supervisor-mode and enters the kernal at an entry point specified by the kernal.
- RISC-V provides `ecall` instruction for this purpose.
- Once CPU switched to supervisor mode, kernal can then validate the args of the system call.
- Will decide whether the app is allowed to perform requested operation, then deny or execute it.
- Important that kernal control entry point for transitions to supervisor mode.
- If application could decide kernal entry point, a malicious app could enter kernal at point where validation of args is skipped.
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.3 Kernal organization__
#### Monolithic kernel
- Key design question, what part of OS should run in supervisor mode.
- One possibility entire OS resides in kernal, implementations  of all system calls run in supervisor mode.
- Entire OS runs with full hardware privilege.
##### Pros
- OS designer doesn't need to decide which part of OS doesn't need  full hardware privilege.
- Easier for different parts of OS to cooperate.
- i.e., OS buffer cache that can be shared both by file system and virtual memory.
##### Cons
- Interfaces between different parts of teh OS are often complex.
- OS designer can make mistakes, which are fatal, cause kernal to fail.
- Crashed system. Must reboot to start again.

#### Microkernal
- Minimize amount of OS code that runs in supervisor mode.
- Executes bulk of OS in user mode.
- OS services running as processes are called servers.
##### Kernel interfaces
- Consists of few low-level functions for starting application, sending messages, accessing device hardware etc.
- Allows kernal to be relatively simple, as most of OS resides in user-level servers.

#### Real world
- Both monolithic and microkernals are popular.
- Many Unix kernals are monolithic.
- Some OS have microkernal but run some of user-level services in kernal space for performance.
- Some monolithic as they started and no reason to change.

#### Core ideas
- Microkernal and monolithic share many key ideas, They implement:
    - system calls.
    - use page tables.
    - handle interrupts.
    - support processes.
    - use locks for concurrency control.
    - implement a file system.

#### xv6 implementation
- Monolithic kernal.
- Thus, xv6 kernal interface corresponds to the OS interface.
- kernal implements the complete OS.
- xv6 doesn't provide many services, its kernal is smaller than some microkernals, but conceptually in monolithic.
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.4 Code: xv6 organization__
- xv6 kernal source is in `kernal/` sub-directory.
#### Source files
```java
bio.c // Disk block cache for the file system.
console.c //Connect to the user keyboard and screen.
entry.S //Very first boot instructions.
exec.c //exec() system call.
file.c //File descriptor support.
fs.c //File system.
kalloc.c //Physical page allocator.
kernelvec.S //Handle traps from kernel, and timer interrupts.
log.c //File system logging and crash recovery.
main.c //Control initialization of other modules during boot.
pipe.c //Pipes.
plic.c //RISC-V interrupt controller.
printf.c //Formatted output to the console.
proc.c //Processes and scheduling.
sleeplock.c //Locks that yield the CPU.
spinlock.c //Locks that don’t yield the CPU.
start.c //Early machine-mode boot code.
string.c //C string and byte-array library.
swtch.S //Thread switching.
syscall.c //Dispatch system calls to handling function.
sysfile.c //File-related system calls.
sysproc.c //Process-related system calls.
trampoline.S //Assembly code to switch between user and kernel.
trap.c //C code to handle and return from traps and interrupts.
uart.c //Serial-port console device driver.
virtio_disk.c //Disk device driver.
vm.c //Manage page tables and address spaces.
```
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.5 Process overview__
- Unit of isolation in xv6 s a `process`.
- Process abstraction prevent one process from wrecking or spying on another process's memory, CPU, file descriptors etc.
- Also prevent process from wrecking kernal itself, so that a process can't subvert the kernel's isolation mechanism.
#### Implementation
- Kernal must implement process abstraction with care.
- Mechanisms used by kernal to implement processes include the user/supervisor mode flag, address spaces, and time-slicing of threads.
#### Process abstraction
- Enfore isolation, process abstraction provides illusion to a program that it has its own private machine.
- Process provides a program with what appeats to be a private memory system, or `address space`, which other processes cannot read or write.
- Process also provides the program with what appears to be its own CPU to execute the program's instructions.
#### Page tables
- xv6 uses page tables (implemented by hardware) to give each process its own address space.
- RISC-V page table translates (maps) a `virtual address` (address that a RISC-V instruction manipulates) to a `physical address` (an address that the CPU chip sends to main memory).
- xv6 maintains seperate page table for each process that defines the process's address space.
#### Virtual address space
- Instructions come first, followed by global variables, then the stack, and finally a "heap" area (for malloc) that the process can expand as needed.
- At top of address space xv6 reserves a page for a `trampoline` and a page for the process's `trapframe`.
- xv6 uses these two pages to transition into the kernel and back.
##### Trampoline page
- Contains code to transition in and out of the kernel
##### Trapframe page
- Mapping the trapframe is necessary to save/restory the state of the user process.

```java
+------------+ <- MAXVA
| trampoline |
+------------+
| trapframe  |
+------------+
|            |
| heap       |
|            |
|            |
|            |
+------------+
| user stack |
+------------+
| user text  |
| and data   |
+------------+ <- 0
```

#### Kernel state
- `struct proc`
- Process's most important pieces of kernal state are it's:
    - Page table. `p->pagetable`
    - Kernel stack.
    - Run state.

#### Thread
- Each process has thread of execution (thread) that executes the process's instructions.
- Thread can be suspended and later resumed.
- To switch transparently between processes, kernel suspend the currently running thread  and resumes another process's thread.
- Much of state of thread (local variable, function call return addresses) is stored on the thread's stacks.

#### Stack
- Each process has two stacks:
    - user stack
    - kernal stack `p->kstack`
- When process is executing user instructions, only its user stack is in use, and kernel stack is empty.
- When process enters kernel (for system call or interrupt), kernal code executes on the process's kernel stack. While process in kernel, its user stack still contains saved data, but isn't actively used.
- Process thread alternates between actively using its user stack and its kernel stack.
- Kernal stack is separate (and protected from user code) so that the kernal can execute even if a process has wrecked its user stack.

#### System call
- Process can make sys call by executing RISC-V `ecall` instruction.
- Instruction raises privilege level and changes the program counter to a kernel-defined entry point.
- Code at entry point switches to kernal stack and executes the kernel instructions that implement the system call.
- When system call complete, kernel switches back to the user stack and returns to user space by calling `sret` instruction, which lowers hardware privileges and resumes executing user instructions just after system call instruction.
- Process's thread can "block" in the kernel to wait for I/O, and resume where it left off when the I/O has finished.
- `p->state` indicated whether process is allocated, ready to run, running, waiting for I/O, or exiting.
- `p->pagetable` holds the process's page table.

#### Summary
- Process bundles two design ideas:
    - an address spave to give a process the illusion of its own memory
    - a thread to give the process the illusion of its own CPU.
- In xv6, a process consists of:
    - one address space.
    - one thread.

--------------------------------------------------
### __02.6 Code: Starting xv6, first process & system call__
#### How kernel starts and runs first process
- RISC-V powers on, intializes itself, rune a boot loader, stored in read-only memory.
- Boot loader loads xv6 kernel into memory.
- In machine mode, CPU executes xv6 starting at `_entry`
- Starts with paging hardware disabled: virtual address map directly to physical.
- Loader loads xv6 kernal into memory at physical `x0x80000000`
- Instructios at `_entry` set up a stack.
- xv6 declares space fo initial stack, `stack0`  in the file `start.c`
- Code at `_entry` loads stack pointer register `sp` with the address `stack0+4096`, the top of stack.
- Now kernal has stack, `_entry` calls into C code at start.
- `start` performs some configurations that is only allowed in machine mode, then switched to supervisor mode (RISC-V provides instruction `mret`, often used to return from a previous call from supervisoe mode to machine mode).
- `start` isn't returning from such a call, instead sets things up as if there had been one; sets the previous privilege mode to supervisor in the register `mstatus`, it sets the return address to `main` by writing `main`s address into the register `mpec`, disables virtual address translation in supervisor mode by writing `0` into page-table register `satp`, and delegates all interrupts and execeptions to supervisor mode.
- Before jumping into supervisor, `start` performs one more task: it programs the clock chip to generate timer interrupts.
- `start` then "returns" to supervisor mode by calling `mret`.
- Causes program counter to change to `main`.
- After `main` initializes several devices and subsystems, it creates first process by calling `userinit`.
- The first process executes a small program written in RISC-V assembly, make makes the first system call in xv6. initcode.S (user/initcode.S:3) loads the number for the exec system call, SYS_EXEC into register a7, and then calls ecall to re-enter the kernel.
- The kernel uses the number in register a7 in syscall SYS_EXEC to sys_exec, which the kernel invokes. As we saw in Chapter 1, exec replaces the memory and registers of the current process with a new program (in this case, /init).
- Once the kernel has completed exec, it returns to user space in the /init process. Init creates a new console device file if needed and then opens it as file descriptors 0, 1, and 2.
- Then it starts a shell on the console. The system is up.
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.7 Security Model__
#### High-level view of typical securtity assumptions.
- OS must assume that a process's user-level code will do its best to wreck the kernael or other processes.
- Kernels goal to restrict each user processess so that all it can do it read/write/execute its own user memory, user general-purpose RISC-V registers, and affect the kernal and other processes in the ways that system calls are inteneded to allow.
- Kernel must prevent any other actions.
- Worthwhile to design safeguards into the kernel.
--------------------------------------------------
### __02.8 Real world__
- Mode OS have adopted the process concept.
- Most processes look similar to xv6's.
- Modern OS, however support several threads within a process, to allow a single process to exploit multiple CPUs.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------

## __03 Page tables__
- Most popular mechanism through which OS provides each process with its own private address space and memory.
- Page table determine what memory addresses mean, and what parts of physical memory can be accessed.
- Allow xv6 isolate different process's address spaces and to multiplex them onto a single physical memory.
--------------------------------------------------
### __03.1 Paging hardware__
- RISC-V instruction (both user and kernel) manipulate virtual addresses.
#### Page table entries (PTE)
- RISC-V page table is logically and array of 2^27 page table entries.
- Each PTE contains a 44-bit physical page number (PPN) and some flags.
- Avoid cost of loading PTEs from physical memory, RISC-V CPU caches page table entries in `Translation Look-aside Buffer` (TLB).
### PTE_flags
- Each PTE contains flag bits that tells paging hardware how the associated virutal address is allowed to be used.
```java
PTE_V // indicate where PTE is present
PTE_R // controls if instructions allowed to read page
PTE_W // controls if instructions allowed to write to page
PTE_X // ...CPU may interpret rhe content of the page as instructions and exe
PTE_U // ...instruction in user mode allowed access to page
```
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------

## __07 Scheduling__
### __07.1 Multiplexing__
- Multiplexes by switching each CPU from  one process to another in two situations.
- This multiplexing creates the illusion that each process has its own CPU, much as xv6 uses the memory allocator and hardware page tables to create the illusion that each process has its own memory.
#### Situation 01
- sleep and wakeup mechanism switches when a process waits for device or pipe I/O to complete, or waits for a child to exit, or waits in the sleep system call.
#### Situation 02
- xv6 periodically forces a switch to cope with processes that compute for long periods without sleeping.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.2 Code: Context switching__
- Switching from one thread to another involves saving the old thread’s CPU registers, and restoring the previously-saved registers of the new thread; the fact that the stack pointer and program counter are saved and restored means that the CPU will switch stacks and switch what code it is executing.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.3 Code: Scheduling__
- The scheduler exists in the form of a special thread per CPU, each running the scheduler function. This function is in charge of choosing which process to run next. A process that wants to give up the CPU must acquire its own process lock p->lock, release any other locks it is holding, update its own state (p->state), and then call sched. 
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.4 Code: mycpu and myproc__
- Xv6 maintains a struct cpu for each CPU which records the process currently running on that CPU (if any), saved registers for the CPU’s scheduler thread, and the count of nested spinlocks needed to manage interrupt disabling. The function mycpu returns a pointer to the current CPU’s struct cpu. RISC-V numbers its CPUs, giving each a hartid. Xv6 ensures that each CPU’s hartid is stored in that CPU’s tp register while in the kernel. This allows mycpu to use tp to index an array of cpu structures to find the right one.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.5 Sleep and wakeup__
- The xv6 kernel uses a mechanism called sleep and wakeup in these situations (and many others). Sleep allows a kernel thread to wait for a specific event; another thread can call wakeup to indicate that threads waiting for an event should resume. Sleep and wakeup are often called sequence coordination or conditional synchronization mechanisms.
- Sleep and wakeup provide a relatively low-level synchronization interface. To motivate the way they work in xv6, we’ll use them to build a higher-level synchronization mechanism called a semaphore that coordinates producers and consumers (xv6 does not use semaphores). A semaphore maintains a count and provides two operations. The “V” operation (for the producer) increments the count. The “P” operation (for the consumer) waits until the count is non-zero, and then decrements it and returns.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.6 Code: Sleep and wakeup__
- The basic idea is to have sleep mark the current process as SLEEPING and then call sched to release the CPU; wakeup looks for a process sleeping on the given wait channel and marks it as RUNNABLE. Callers of sleep and wakeup can use any mutually convenient number as the channel. Xv6 often uses the address of a kernel data structure involved in the waiting.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.7 Code: Pipes__
- A more complex example that uses sleep and wakeup to synchronize producers and consumers is xv6’s implementation of pipes.
- Each pipe is represented by a struct pipe, which contains a lock and a data buffer. The fields nread and nwrite count the total number of bytes read from and written to the buffer. The buffer wraps around: the next byte written after buf[PIPESIZE-1] is buf[0]. The counts do not wrap.
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.8 Code: Wait, exit, and kill__
- Sleep and wakeup can be used for many kinds of waiting. 
--------------------------------------------------
### __07.9 Process Locking__
- The lock associated with each process (p->lock) is the most complex lock in xv6. A simple way to think about p->lock is that it must be held while reading or writing any of the following struct proc fields: p->state, p->chan, p->killed, p->xstate, and p->pid. These fields can be used by other processes, or by scheduler threads on other cores, so it’s natural that they must be protected by a lock.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
▲
▼