# _02.1: Operating System Structure_
## __02.1.1 Dual Modes of Operation__
- Divide into User Mode and Kernal Mode.
- Different privledges, user programs cannot directly address hardware, must go through OS.
```java
        +------------------+
User    |   Applications   |
Mode    +------------------+
                 |
------------------------------------
                 |
                 ▼
        +------------------+
Kernal  | Operating System |
Mode    +------------------+
                 |
                 ▼
        +------------------+
        |     Hardware     | [Privileged]
        +------------------+
```
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.2 Kernel (Supervisor) Mode__
- Executing code has unrestricted access to hardware.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.3 User Mode__
- Executing code, no direct access to hardware and memory beyond its own processes.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.4 User Mode to Kernal Mode__
- interrupt
    - rfi: return from interrupt
- syscall
    - rtn: return
- exception
    - exec: kernel function, creates, bring in new process.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.5 Interrupts__
- Handling of interrupts are transparent to the user program.
- On Return from interrupt, OS restore the state of user program.
- User program continues at exactly the same point as when it was interrupted.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.6 Exceptions__
- OS identifies the cause of exception.
- User program has exception handling?
    - YES: OS adjusts user program state and calls its handler.
    - NO: OS kills the user program.
- Effects of exception are visible to user programs.
- Causes abnormal execution flow.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.7 System Calls__
- A system call is a function that a user program uses to ask the operating system for a particular service.
- To user looks like a normal function call.
- User program executes a `trap` instruction (system call).
- Every system call is assigned a number.
- Processor hardware calls the OS.
- OS identifies the required service and parameters and execute it.
- Result of the call is return through a register.
- Execution returns to user program (rtn).
- Week 5, setup own system call in xv6.
- Appears as function call to the user program.
- The most fundamental concept need to understand.
--------------------------------------------------
## __02.1.8 Two Main OS Structures__
### __Monolithic__
#### Pros:
- Easier for subsystems to cooperate.
- Faster more efficient.
#### Cons:
- Subsystems are not isolated from each other, easier get bugs.
- Less flexibile.

### __Microkernal__
#### Pros:
- More isolation -> more fault tolerance
- More flexibility.
#### Cons:
- Harder get good performance.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------