# _05.2: Paging_
## __05.2.1 Physical memory space become `fragmented`__
### Problem
- Chunks of segments of different memory sizes get allocated and deallocated as processes start and terminate.
### Solution
- Divide address space of a process into `fixed-sized` units (`pages`)
- Physical memory is viewed as an array of `fixed-sized` slots (`page frames` or `frames`)
- Size of pages and frames should be same, usually between 512 bytes to 16Mbytes.
### Virtual Address
- `Page size = Frame size = 16kB`
### Pagetable
- One table per process.
--------------------------------------------------
## __05.2.2 Issues with Paging__
### Software Implementation
- Page tables are stored in memory.
- Address translation requires memory lookup.
- Doing this for every instruction fetch & load/store of variables is a big overhead.

### Hardware Implementation
- Limited number of registers in MMU (not suitable for larger page tables).
- Increase context switching times.
--------------------------------------------------
## __05.2.3 Translation Look-Aside Buffer (TLB)__
- Small, fast, associative memory.
- Typically `32 to 1024 entries`.
- Integrated with the MMU.
- TLB entries are `key-value` pairs.
- Keys are `looked up in parallel`.

### Effectiveness Equation
- Higher the hit ration, the more efficient the memory access.
```java
               Number of TLB hit
Hit ratio = ------------------------ x 100%
            Total num of page lookup
```

### Effective Memory-access Time
- `TLB hit ratio = 90%`
- TLB Access time = 10ns
- Main memory access time = 100ns
```java
Effective access time = 0.9 x 10 + (1 - 0.9) x (10 + 100)
                      = 9 + 11 = 20ns
```
--------------------------------------------------
## __05.2.4 Multi-level Page Tables__
- Break up a large page table into smaller ones using a hierarchy of tables.
- A 2-level page table:
    - each table has 2^10 entries
    - Two tables give a total of
    - 2^10 x 2^10 = 2^20 entries
```java
page number   page offset
+----+----+----+
| p1 | p2 |  d |
+----+----+----+
  10   10   10
```
- Appear to require same amount of storage space
- `BUT`:
    - Each sub-table if the (inner) page table doesn't need to be stored consecutively
    - Unused sub-tables don't need to be allocated space.
--------------------------------------------------
## __05.2.5 xv6 Pagetable__
### RISC-V Address
- xv6 runs on `Sv39` RISC-V
- Only 39 bits of the 64-bit virtual address are used.
- Page size = 4kB
- Pagetable has 2^27 entries (PTES)

### Detailed Pagetable Structure
- Three-level pagetable
```java
     9         9        9
+---------+---------+---------+
| Level 2 | Level 1 | Level 0 |
+---------+---------+---------+
```
### Page-fault exception
- if any of the 3 PTEs required for address translation is not present.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------