# _07.1: CPU Scheduling_
## __07.1.1 Process Scheduling__
### Scheduler
- Policy: Determine how to pick a process to run.

### Dispatcher
- Mechanism: How to switch between processes.

### Goals
- `Efficiency`
    - CPU Utilization: percentage of time the CPU is not idle.
    - Throughput: number of processes completed per unit time.
    - Turnaround time: average time for a process to complete.
- `Fairness`
    - Waiting time: total time waiting in the ready queue.
    - Response time: time needed to start responding to user submitted command.
--------------------------------------------------
## __07.1.2 Types of Policies__
### Non-preemptive (cooperative)
- Switch when running process is blocked or terminated.

### Preemptive (non-cooperative)
- Switch even when the running process is ready to continue.
- e.g. according to time.
--------------------------------------------------
## __07.1.3 Scheduling Algorithms__
### First In First Out
- Ready processes are already organized as a queue.
- Also know as first come first served. (FCFS).

### Shortest Job First
- Run the process with the shortest (known or estimated) CPU burst time in the READY queue.

### Round Robin
- Oldest method.

### Priority Scheduling
- Each process is assigned a `priority`.
- `READY` process with highest priority is scheduled.
- If there is more than 1 process with same priority, use round robin scheduling.
- Typically pre-emptive, if a higher priority process enters the queue while a lower priority process is running, the later process will be preempted.

### Multilevel Feedback Queue
- Dynamically change the priority of a process over its lifetime.
- Do not assume to know much about a process.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
