# _08.2: Thread Synchronization_
## __08.2.1 Preventing Race Conditions__
- Restrict access to critical section.
- Mechanisms available in Pthread:
    - Join
    - Mutex (Mutual Exclusion)
    - Condition variables
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.2 Mutex__
### Mutual Exclusion
```js
         |
         ▼
+------------------+
|    Entry Code    |
+------------------+
         |
         ▼
+------------------+ No two processes can
| Critical Section | execute this code
+------------------+ simultaneously
         |
         ▼
+------------------+
|    Exit Code     |
+------------------+
         |
         ▼
```

### Basic Idead of a Lock (Mutex)
- Global variable (referred to as `lock`).
- It is either `available` (free) or `aquired` (locked or held).
- Only one process can hold the lock - owner
- Locks for user programs and those for kernel code are implemented seperately.
- Implementation needs support from hardware (atomic instructions).
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.3 Mutex in Pthread__
- Provide `mutual exclusion` - only one thread can access a shared resource at any one time.
- Also know as `locks`
- Limitation - can only be applied to threads in a single process.
- When a mutex lock is attempted against a mutex held but another thread, the thread is blocked until the mutex is unlocked.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.4 Mutex Deadlock__
- Mutex is locked but not unlocked.
- Often occurs when a section of code held a lock and then waits on another lock.
- Deadlocked waiting.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.5 Requirements for Concurrent__
### Deadlock-Free
- Given there are processes that want to enter the critical section, some processes will eventually enter this critical section.

### Starvation-Free
- If a process wants to enter a critical section, it must eventually enter this critical section.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.6 Atomic Instructions__
- Modern processors have hardware instructions that can be executed without being interrupted.

### test_and_set
#### What is does logically:
```c
boolean test_and_set (boolean *target)
{
    boolean rv = *target;
    *target = true;
    return rv;
}
```
#### Properties:
- Executed atomically.
- Returns the original value of passed parameter.
- Set the new value of passed parameter to `true`

### compare_and_swap
#### What is does logically:
```c
int compare_and_swap(int *value, int expected, int new_value)
{
    int temp = *value;
    if(*value == expected) *value = new_value;
    return temp;
}
```
#### Properties:
- Executed atomically.
- Returns the original value of passed parameter value.
- Set the var `value` the value of the passed parameter `new_value` but only if `*value == expected` is true. That is, swap takes plave only under this condition.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.7 Common Locks (for Kernel)__
### Spinlock
- Spin Lock, repeats test again, looping, spinning.
- Continues running the check.
- xv6 typically use spinlocks.
- Good for holding for short time.

### Sleeplock
- Sleep Lock, doesn't spin, calls `yield()`. RUNNING -> READY.
- Thread goes to sleep.
- Less resources used.
- Requires context switching (twice) and therefore is too costly if the lock is held only for short durations.
- Good for holding for long time.

### Spinlock vs Sleeplock
#### User mode lock implementations
- Mostly use sleeping mutex.
- Potentially holds lock for longer.

#### Kernel mode locks
- Typically spinning.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.2.8 Using Locks__
- Locks are simply varibales.
- Correct usage left to programmer.
- All share kernel data structures `must` be accessed through locks.

### Design decision
- Coarse-grained locking: one lock for a group of shared data.
- Fine-grained locking: allows better parallelism but harder to manage.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------