# _08.1: Threads_
## __08.1.1 Concurrency vs Parallelism__
### Concurrent
- Running several code at same time, not always the same code.
- Multiple tasks which start, run, and complete in overlapping time periods, in no specific order.
- Have two or more threads of execution `progressing` at the same time.
- To happen at the same time or appeat to happen at same time.

### Parallelism
- Running several same code at same time.
- Multiple tasks or subtasks of the same task that literally run at the same time on a hardware with multiple computing resources like multi-core processor.
- Have two or more threads executing `simultaneously`.
- Execution occurs at the same physical instant.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.2 Motivations for Multi-threading__
- Take advantange of multi-core, speed up execution.
- Relatively expensive to create new process.
- Relatively high communication overhead between processes.
- Context switching between processes is relatively expensive.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.3 Multi-threading__
- Allow more than one point of execution (more than one Program counter) per process.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.4 Threads__
### Thread of Control
- A sequence of instructions being executed in a program.

### A thread has its own
- Thread ID
- Stack
- Set of registers, incl. Program counter(PC) and stack pointer(SP)
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.5 Advantages of Threads__
- `Share` open files, data strcutures, global variables, child processes, etc.
- Peer threads can `communicate` without using sys calls.
- Threads faster to create/terminate/switch than processes. (no additional address space)
- Avoid blocking due to slow I/O
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.6 Benefits of Multi-threading__
- Improve throughput.
- Increase responsiveness.
- Improves program structure, more planning required.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.7 Disadvantages of Multi-threading__
- Shared data, need careful control of what can be changed.
- No protection between threads.
- Sending some signals to a process affects `all threads` running.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.8 Thread Lifecycle__
- Similar to that of process.
- Ready, Running, Blocked
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.9 Thread Interface__
### User Threads
- Live entireley in user mode.
- Managed by user-level threads library.
- POSIX Pthreads, Java

### Kernel Threads
- Managed by the kernel.
- Supported by virtually all OS's.

### Differences
```js
                    +-------------------------+------------------------+
                    | USER-LEVEL THREADS      | KERNEL-LEVEL THREADS   |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| THREADS           | invisible to kernel     | visible to kernel      |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| SCHEDULING POLICY | user defined            | kernel defined         |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| THREAD SWITCHING  | non-premeptive          | preemptive             |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| CONTEXT SWITCHING | faster, done by runtime | slower, done by kernel |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| BLOCKING CALLS    | block the whole process | block single thread    |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| THREAD TABLE      | held by the process     | held by the kernel     |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
```
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.10 Mapping__
### One-to-One
- Easy to manage implemented by linux and windows.

### Many-to-Many
- Flexible but hard to manage.

#### What happens if the main thread did not call `pthread_join()`?
- The main thread may finish first and the whole process terminates including the child thread.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.11 Re-entrant Functions__
- Allows itself to be called even though it hasn't completed.
- Can be called recursively and can be called simultaneously by two or more processes.
- Often required in real-time applications or in situations where interrupt code and non-interrupt code must share a function.
- Function can be safely `reentered` before a current executing call to the same function is complete.
    - Does not use global variables with synchronization.
    - Only requires local variables(on stack).
    - Access to shared variables are synchronized.
- Non-reentrant functions are dangerous for multi-threaded programs.
    - usually use one or more global variable.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.12 Thread Scheduling__
- Thread is normally treated as the basic unit for scheduling.
- Not implemented in xv6, essentially one thread per process.
- Same scheduling policies as discussed in process scheduling apply.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.13 Pthread__
### int pthread_yield(void)
- similar to `yield()`
- Calling thread relinquishes the CPU/
- Another thread is scheduled to run by the scheduler.

### int pthread_cancel(pthread_t th)
- Cancel send cancellation `request` to `th`
- Request are queued, handled at indetermined later time.
- Deffered (Default)
- Asynchronous
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.14 Known Issues__
- One thread calls `fork()`
    - Duplicates only the calling thread (POSIX compliant)
    - Some OS two different forks.
    - Generally, don't call fork in multithreaded code.
- exec() command replaces entire process.
--------------------------------------------------
## __08.1.15 Handling Signals__
- `kill(pid_t pid, int signal)`
- If process has multiple threads, which one should handle the signal?
- Signal is usually delivered to the first thread not blocking it.
- POSIX: `pthread_kill(pthread_t tid, int signal)`, send to thread.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------