# _09.2: Files and Directories_
## __09.2.1 Roles of File Systems__
- Sharing
    - Across users and application.
- Persistent storage
    - Contents stored in main memory are not persistent.
    - Make data available after the process is terminated.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.2 Architecture__
- On-disk and in-memory data structures
    - A tree of named files and directories.
    - Record indentities of disk block which hold data for each file.
    - Record areas of the disk that are free.
- Design considerations
    - Support crash recovery
    - Speed
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.3 Files__
-  A linear array of bytes.
- Name
    - High-level name, for users.
    - Low-level name, `inode` number.

### Inode
- An inode is a data structure that keeps track of all the files and directories within a Linux or UNIX-based filesystem. 
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.4 Directory__
- `Names` - both high and low level similar to files.
- `Content` -  a list of user-readable name and low-level name pairs.
- Each entry is either a file or another directory.
- Unix-based systems - directory hierarchy starts at root directory `/`
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.5 File System Interface(1)__
- Creating a new file.
- Reading and writing a file.
- Removing file.
- Getting information about a file.
- Permission and access control.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.6 Read/Write Operations__
- ALl these operations make use of the file descriptor.
- `close()` closes the file.
- Reading/writing files: `read()` / `write()`
- Writes are buffered in memory temporarily.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.7 File System Interface(2)__
- Making a new directory.
- Reading a directory.
- Deleting a directory.
- Linking files.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.8 Hard Links__
- Creates a file that points to the same inode number of another file.
- These files may have different filenames or in different parts of the directory tree.
- Inode maintains a link count - file data can only be "deleted" when there are no links to it.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.9 Symbolic Links__
- Creates a name that points to another filename.
- If the main file is removed, then th link points to an invalid entry.
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.10 Access Control__
- Unix-based system use permission bits.
- `-rw-rw-r--`
--------------------------------------------------
## __09.2.11 Mounting a File System (Linux)__
- Make a file system using the tool `mkfs`
- Mounting a filesystem connects the files to a specific point the directory tree.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------