# _10.2: Journal and Logs__
## __10.2.1 Crash Consistency Problem__
### Only one write succeeds - 3 possibilities:
- `Db written`: no reference to data block
- `inode written`: inode points to non-existent data
- `Bitmap written`: Block 5 could no longer be used
- Result: File System Inconsistent

### Only two write succeeds but one failed - 3 possibilities:
- `Db write failed`: garbage data
- `inode write failed`: inconsisten file system
- `Bitmap write failed`: no idea which file the data belong to
- Result: File System Inconsistent
--------------------------------------------------
## __10.2.2 File System Checker__
### fsck
- unix tool for finding and repairing file system inconsistencies.
- Run `before` a file system is mounted.
- Check - superblock, free blocks, inode state and links, duplicates, bad blocks, directory contents.

### Problem with fsck
- too slow
- As disk size increases, it takes a long time to check the whole file system.
- The number of inconsistencies is usually very small.
--------------------------------------------------
## __10.2.3 Journal__
- Also called `Write-Ahead Logging`.
- Idea borrowed from database.

### Basic idea
- Write a note about what is intended to happen `before` writing to a structure on disk.
- Write this note in a log area.
--------------------------------------------------
## __10.2.4 Crash Scenarios__
### Crash occurs during write to journal
#### Solution
- Add a checksum of the contents of the journal to the begin and end transaction blocks.
- If the computed and stored checksums do not match, transaction is invalid and the pending update is skipped.

### Crash occurs after write to journal
- Complete all pending transactions during system recovery.
--------------------------------------------------
## __10.2.5 Finite Log Area__
- Use a `Journal Superblock` to
    - Mark the oldest and newest transactions in the log.
    - Records which transaction have not been checkpointed.
--------------------------------------------------
## __10.2.6 Metadata Journaling__
- Writing data (DB in our example) twice is not efficient
- Write only journal metadata:during

### Steps
1. Write data to final destination.
2. Write metadata to journal.
3. Journal commit - write `TxE` to the log.
4. Checkpoint metadata.
5. Free - mark transaction completed in superblock.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------