# _11.3: Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks_
## __11.3.1 RAID__
- Using multiple disks to increase performance, capacity, and reliability of a disk system.
- Reliability is provided through redundancy.
- Transparent to the file system.
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.2 RAID Level 0__
- No redundancy.
- `Striping`.
- spread the blocks of the array across disks.
- Example: chunk size = 1 block.
- Increases parallelism of reads and writes to single file.
- In practice - large chunks.
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.3 RAID Level 1__
- Mirroring.
- Two physical copies of each block.
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.4 RAID Level 4__
- Use `parity` to provide redundancy.
- Example, Exclusive-OR (XOR)
- First compute the parity of a block on a single disk, then computer the parity across disks.

### Parity drive
- A parity drive is a hard drive used in a RAID array to provide fault tolerance. 
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.5 RAID Level 5__
- Rotatin parity.
- Otherwise same as RAID-4
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.6 RAID Level 6__
- P + Q Redundancy Scheme
- P is `Parity`
- Q is an error-correcting code (e.g. Reed-Solomon)
- Similar to RAID-5 with an additional block of code.
- P and Q are stored for every (N-2) blocks of data for N disks.
- Able to tolerate two drive failures.
--------------------------------------------------
## __11.3.7 Selecting RAID Level__
### Level 0
- data loss is not critical.

### Level 1
- reliability and performance are both important.

### Level 5
- preferred over level 1 for large volumes of data.

### Level 6
- most common for storage arrays when the number of disks available are larger.
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------